# Practical work on VDM++

## Goals
The goal of this practical work is to develop, test and document an executable formal model of a high
integrity software system in VDM++ using the Overture tool or the VDMTools. At the end of the
work, students should have acquired the ability of formally modeling software systems in VDM++,
and of demonstrating the consistency of the model. The work is to be performed by groups of two to
three students attending the same class (turma). The groups will be defined and the themes assigned
(different themes for different groups in the same class) in the practical classes of the week of 27
November to 1 December 2017.

## Deliverables

The project should be organized in a way similar to the Vending Machine example (see the MFES
page in Moodle). The practical work should be concluded and the deliverables (final report, VDM++
project files, UML project files) submitted in a .zip file through Moodle until **11pm January 3**. It may
be applied a penalty of 2 (points out of 20) for each day late. The presentations will be scheduled for
the first week of January (4th or 5th of January). Presentation is mandatory for **ALL** students. **If you
miss presentation you will get zero points out of twenty**.

## Report Structure

You should incorporate the developed VDM++ classes in a single report (to be submitted in PDF
format), written in English or Portuguese, covering the following items (which are also the assessment
items):

1. Front page with authors, date and context (FEUP, MIEIC, MFES) **[1%]**

2. Informal system description and list of requirements **[10%]**

   a. Requirements should include any relevant constraints (regarding safety, etc.).

   b. Each requirement should have an identifier.

   c. You may have optional requirements.

3. Visual UML model **[5%]**

   a. A use case model, describing the system actors and use cases, with a short description
of each major use case.

   b. One or more class diagram(s), describing the structure of the VDM++ model, with a
short description of each class, plus any other relevant explanations.

4. Formal VDM++ model **[50%]**

   a. VDM++ classes, properly commented.

   b. Needed data types (e.g., String, Date, etc.) should be modeled with types, values and
functions.

   c. Domain entities should be modeled with classes, instance variables and operations.
You are expected to make adequate usage of the VDM++ types (sets, sequences,
maps, etc.) and create a model at a high level of abstraction.

   d. The model should contain adequate contracts, i.e., invariants, preconditions, and
postconditions. Postconditions need only be defined in cases where they are
significantly different from the operation or function body (e.g., the postcondition of a
sqrt(x) operation, which simply states that x = RESULT * RESULT, should be
significantly different than the body); for learning purposes, you should define
postconditions for at least two operations.

   e. During the development of the project, if you foresee that the size of the VDM++
model will be less than 5 pages (or 7.5 pages in case of groups of 3 students) or more
than 10 pages (or 15 pages in case of groups of 3 students), you should contact your
teacher to possibly adjust the scope of the system or the modeling approach being
followed.

5. Model validation (i.e., testing) **[20%]**

   a. VDM++ test classes, containing adequate and thorough test cases defined by means
of operations or traces.

   b. Evidences of test results (passed/failed) and test coverage. It is sufficient to present
the system classes mentioned in 4 painted with coverage information. Ideally, 100%
coverage should be achieved. Optionally, you may include figures of examples
exercised in the test cases.

   c. You should include requirements traceability relationship between test cases and
requirements. Ideally, 100% requirements coverage should be achieved. It is
sufficient to indicate in comments the requirements that are exercised by each test.

6. Model verification (i.e., consistency analysis) **[5%]**

   a. An example of domain verification, i.e., a proof sketch that a precondition of an
operator, function or operation is not violated. You should present the proof obligation
generated by the tool and your proof sketch.

   b. An example of invariant verification, i.e., a proof sketch that the body of an operation
preserves invariants. You should present the proof obligation generated by the tool
and your proof sketch.

7. Code generation **[5%]**

   a. You should try to generate Java code from the VDM++ model and try to execute or
test the generated code. Here you should describe the steps followed and results
achieved.

8. Conclusions **[3%]**

   a. Results achieved.

   b. Things that could be improved.

   c. Division of effort and contributions between team members.

9. References **[1%]**

# Rally Competitions

In this project you should model all information needed to manage different rally competitions. Rally
is the leading, GPS enabled, competition grade application for use in almost all types of rally
including time trial, special stage, regulatory, TSD, historic and vintage rallies.
Rally supports single and multi-day rallies containing an almost unlimited number of sections
containing all types of time and passage controls, grouping, service, refuel, holding, locality, special
and time trial elements as well an unlimited number of in sector average speed, time and distance
changes. Competitions are in different places with possibly different participants. A competition may
have different steps and, at the end, a winner. It should be possible to know all the time spent by each
participant, the winners of different competitions, the sponsors, among others.

See [https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.crml.android.rally](https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.crml.android.rally)
